welcome to ECE 165 this is a lecture on
dynamic logic so we're going to consider
this a new section title so let's go
ahead and write that down dynamic logic
let me go ahead and double box that it's
a section title and if you're following
along at home the west and harris book
has a section on dynamic logic that
would be in section nine point two point
four and the revised two cost a nickel
each book if you want to read that for
more information would be section 6.3 ok
so what is dynamic logic well I'm going
to say what it's not
so unlike static CMOS which is what
we've been studying all along which has
direct connections to VDD or ground so
unlike normal static CMOS which is what
we've been discussing all along dynamic
logic as the name may imply relies no
comma there dynamic logic relies on
temporary or dynamic hence the word
storage of logic values
on capacitors so what does this mean
the best way to understand what this
means is let's go ahead and look at an
example okay so let's imagine we had
some voltage source and it is connecting
via some sort of switch namely a
transistor and this connects to some
sort of capacitor
okay so let's call this capacitor C this
is V out over here now
what I'd like to do is is leave a little
bit of space next to the C we're going
to draw something there in a minute in a
minute okay so bear with me so in the
mean time let's go ahead and draw the
timing diagram for what happens here
okay so we have T this is the position
of the switch if we're drawing a zero
then nothing's happening and if we're
drawing something high then the switch
is on and then we go back to zero so the
switch is open and that's a situation
okay so we say the switch is closed when
the value of this logic here is positive
or high in this timing diagram so what
happens to V out okay so this is V out
all right
so prior to when the switch is open
prior to this all happening we actually
don't know what the value of V out is
okay so I'm in fact I'm not even going
to bother drawing it we don't know what
what the value is it turns out we will
have a way to do this moving forward but
let's just say we don't know all right
now when the switch closes we know that
the voltage will rise up to whatever
that input voltage happens to be okay so
if this is you know V in then this will
rise to the N all right now what happens
when the switch closes or I'm sorry when
the switch opens back up when this
switch opens back up well there's
nowhere for the charge on the capacitor
to go so it should just you know sit
there like so okay and this is really
the basis of dynamic logic it's that
once you charge a capacitor
unless there's some mechanism by which
charge will leak away that logic level
will stay there for you know forever
unless there's a path to leak that way
okay so unfortunately there is a path
for this to leak away so we never have
capacitors just sitting there in the
ether not connected to anything there's
going to be some degree of parasitic
resistance through sub-threshold
conduction gate leakage and so on let's
call this our leak okay actually that
should if I'm following my own color
code that should be in red our leak okay
so what ends up happening if we kind of
extend this timing diagram out to a long
time as eventually this will slowly
start to decay until it reaches zero in
this scenario okay so we say here is
that this would expect to stay
indefinitely except
for our leak okay because our leak is
there it is going to eventually
discharge this this voltage all the way
to zero if our leak is indeed connected
to zero so this turns out to be the
biggest challenge or rather one of the
biggest challenges at an in dynamic
logic is that the logic values are only
valid at certain instances in time and
when we're designing a digital system we
have to be aware of when these instances
in time are in order to to design these
circuits correctly so now that we
understand the basic principles of
dynamic logic we're storing logic values
on parasitic capacitors let's go ahead
and draw a general dynamic logic gate
okay so a general dynamic logic gate
okay so it turns out a general dynamic
logic gate is fairly straightforward
we have ap Moss at the top not
surprising our output comes out here
output is say equal to Y we have some
function which will describe later and
then an additional and Moss transistor
on the bottom here okay now these n moss
and this P Moss are connected together
or the gates are connected together and
the input signal here is what we call
Phi all right we'll get into what that
means momentarily
now the logical inputs into this
function are given into this function f
here okay so what's going on here so
first of all let's call this function f
this is actually going to be the same
pull down network as before okay so if
we we know how to design a pulldown
network and static complementary CMOS
logic this will be exactly that except
only the pulldown not to pull up on the
PMO side of things we have this device
here called a pre charge switch
or pre-charge transistor I suppose and
on the end mas below this function we
have what we call and evaluate switch or
transistor ok so how does this circuit
work the circuit works in two phases
okay the first phase is what we call the
pre-charge phase this is when Phi is
equal to zero okay when Phi is equal to
zero the bottom evaluates which is off
the top P MOS is on okay so what this
means is that the pulldown network is
off because that bottom evaluate switch
is off and the pull-up network which is
just that p MOS is on and therefore Y is
pre charged to VDD now we should note
during this case that the output in this
case Y is pre charged to VDD so other
nodes in the pulldown network may be pre
charged because they're comprising of n
MOS transistors to VDD minus VT n okay
so that would be the case if say for
example the gate inputs into the n Mo's
transistors in the pulldown network
we're on because Y is on that's going to
in charge some of these charge some of
these internal nodes to VDD minus VT n
ignoring sub-threshold leakage of course
so that's phase one the next phase if
that the P MOS which was called the pre
charge switch then the next phase ought
to be called the evaluate phase and
indeed that's the case evaluate
this is when Phi is equal to one okay so
in this phase here one of two things
happens okay option a I suppose if the
pulldown network is on then Y is driven
low just like it would in a static
complementary CMOS circuit all right
option B is otherwise if the pulldown
network is not on then there is no DC
path to the output right the P MOSFET
pre-charge switch that's no longer on
the pulldown network is not on even
though the evaluate switch is on the
pulldown network creating function f is
not so there's no way to pull it down to
the out pull the output down to ground
there's no DC path to the output in this
configuration
so therefore the charge stored on Y
remains there okay noting that there's
always a little bit of parasitic
capacitance on every node here okay so
in a general dynamic gate what we do is
we pre charge the output to VDD during
this phase the logic function is not
operating there's no function being
evaluated here okay it's only during the
evaluate phase when Phi goes high the
pre-charge switch turns off if the
pulldown network is active then Y will
be pulled down if the pulldown network
is not active then Y will remain high
okay so this is the way that we compute
logic functions using dynamic logic
noting that the output is only valid
during the
evaluate phase during the pre-charge
phase the output is not valid so now
that we understand how a normal or a
general dynamic logic gate works let's
go ahead and talk about the simplest
possible gate that would be a dynamic
inverter okay so a dynamic inverter
looks something as follows we have our
pre-charge PMO's transistor this creates
our output Y and then on the bottom we
have two n MOS transistors one is the
input and the other is connected to this
clock signal that we are calling still
in this case Phi okay so this is what a
dynamic inverter looks like now the best
way to understand how this dynamic
inverter works and frankly the best way
to understand any dynamic logic circuit
is to draw a timing diagram so get used
to drawing timing diagrams because we
are going to be doing it all the time so
first we'll start with clock Phi it'll
look something like this goes high for a
little while and low high low this is
just a normal clock signal so it goes
high and low alternately with a 50% duty
cycle now when I'm evaluating a dynamic
logic circuit I like to be very clear
with myself when I'm doing so and just
very clearly indicate what region or
what mode of operation that device is in
when Phi is low we're in the pre-charge
phase when Phi is high we're in the
evaluate phase okay now this is perhaps
obvious but I like to just indicate this
when I'm doing homework problems and
exam problems and so on to help make
things extra clear for me so I don't get
confused alright so what we interested
in doing is trying to analyze basically
the behavior between these important
interval
here okay so let's just put some dotted
lines this helps with our with our
timing diagram analysis
okay now let's further say that input a
looks something like this it's zero
initially and then it goes high Oh
somewhere over here and then it stays
high for the rest of the cycle okay so
what does output Y look like all right
so one thing we can do because I've
indicated where the pre-charge phases
are we can just directly draw in the
pre-charge results we know during the
pre-charge phase Y should be equal to
logic 1 so we can just directly draw
that in alright now all we have to do is
fill in what happens during the evaluate
phase all right in the first evaluate
phase we see that a is equal to zero so
that n MOS transistor is off the
evaluate transistor is on but transistor
a is off and so therefore there's no way
for Y to be pulled down so therefore Y
is just going to hang out where it was
before okay so we call this dynamic
storage of logic one okay all right so
that's one third of the battle let's now
look at the next pre-charge phase so
you'll note interestingly during this
next pre-charge phase that a goes high
during this pre-charge phase but that
doesn't matter to the output because the
output is well pre charging right so a
goes high but that evaluate and mas
transistor is off so there's no way for
Y to go low that is until the circuit
ends up in the evaluate phase in the
evaluate phase that evaluate an MOS
transistor is going to turn on a is now
on so now there is a direct path to
connect the output to ground okay so
this goes low after some delay and then
in the pre-charge phase it goes back up
okay now it is still low in the next
value
Faye's so it's gonna go down back up
down and assuming that we go into
another evaluate phase over here and so
on and so forth okay so again let's just
be extra clear here this is driven low
by the pulled down network okay so a
couple things to observe here one is
that when the output of a dynamic
inverter is supposed to be one the node
doesn't switch at all it just stays
there just like it normally would in a
normal static CMOS inverter however if
the output is supposed to be zero
because we have this pre-charge phase
what this effectively means is that the
output now toggles between zero and one
as we go through the evaluate phase back
to the pre-charge phase back to the
evaluate phase and so on and so forth
okay so if you are concerned about
dynamic power CV squared F times alpha
alpha in this case is rather high if the
output is constantly a zero so that may
not be desirable depending on the
application you are working in in fact I
would say that under most scenarios
dynamic logic is rather power expensive
because of this high activity factor so
you might be asking yourselves why the
heck would we use it if it has higher
power well it turns out there's a very
good reason to use this and we will
discuss this momentarily so before we
get into the analysis of how effectively
dynamic logic works I want to make sure
that we all know about the one rule we
must follow okay so there's one rule you
must follow about dynamic logic
okay and it's it's important we wouldn't
emphasize it as the one rule if it
weren't important
okay so during this rule says that
during the evaluate phase the inputs to
the pulldown network are only allowed to
do the following they can either a go
from zero to one it's rather
straightforward or option B is be stable
okay so in other words ie there's one
missing condition here they are not
permitted to go from one to zero and you
might say well that's kind of a rather
imposing rule you know when we build
logic we'd certainly like the logic to
go from one to zero sometimes right
otherwise how do you do computation so
we'll address that in a moment but
before we do that let's understand why
this is an important rule so here's why
okay
and again as I you know suggested we are
going to draw a timing diagram to
understand this okay so let's imagine
that this is Phi over zero one zero one
back to zero okay and let's imagine we
have an input a and it goes like so and
then it does something like this okay so
that's actually breaking a rule so
remember I'm just going to
know how that happened
I'm just going to go ahead and draw in
where the evaluate phases are happening
here so let's go ahead and compute what
happens to output Y in a dynamic
inverter as an example okay so when a is
zero we expect the output to be high in
fact it should be high because of the
pre-charge phase here okay now when we
get into the evaluate phase a is still
zero so therefore the output remains
high all right but at some point during
this evaluate phase a goes high all
right that's going to drop the output to
zero and then back up when we re-enter
the pre-charge phase okay so this is
outputting a zero which is correct okay
so so far so good
alright now what happens in the next
phase as soon as we hit the evaluate
phase our output goes to zero and that's
good that that's that's correct okay so
far so good but now input a goes from
logic one to logic zero okay so that
pulldown network is turning off during
the evaluate phase in normal static CMOS
if the pulldown network turns off then
the pull-up network should turn on and
that should pull the logic level up okay
however this is a dynamic logic circuit
and that does not happen okay it stays
low because there's nothing to pull it
back up alright so this is the reason
why we don't do this okay so this here
is incorrect this is not a valid
computation that we're doing here all
right so this poses a bit of a problem
and to understand this problem let's
consider an example does the following
circuit work does this circuit work
okay all I'm going to do something very
simple is I'm going to take a dynamic
logic inverter okay so this is just a
normal dynamic logic inverter this is
gate five this is input a okay so I
haven't done anything crazy here and I'm
going to connect it to another dynamic
logic inverter in cascade so all I'm
doing here is I'm putting two inverters
in cascade okay and so when I when I
draw the clock signal going through here
I don't mean that as connecting to the
bulk I just mean that it's the clock
signal going through here so what I'm
going to do is I'm going to take this
guy call that B and take that to the
output Y okay so the question is does
the circuit work as I mentioned the best
way to try and understand this is to
draw a timing diagram so let's say we
have a pre-charge phase here pre-charge
phase and then we entered the evaluate
phase and then back down to the
pre-charge phase okay so let's just
again to be very clear about what's
going on here labeled that as the
evaluate phase I'm just going to draw
some dotted lines here to make a
counting of when things happen a little
easier so let's imagine that a does
obeys the rule okay
a goes high during the evaluate phase it
goes from zero to one that's okay by the
rules that we've established okay so
what does B do well B is initially pre
charged and I suppose actually I should
I this is actually a mistake here a oh
yeah we don't know where a is coming
from so it could be from some non non
dynamic logic circuit as an example okay
so in this case B is pre charged when
the evaluate phase happens B will hold
steady at logic one
and then after a short delay it's going
to fall okay and then when we re-entered
the pre-charge phase it goes back up all
right now let me just annotate where
this happens so we have a delay from a
heading into B through that inverter
structure all right so so far so good
everything is working fine now what
about why well why was pre charge during
the pre-charge phase so that's good B is
high so after a small delay in this case
it's actually coming from the edge of
the value of the clock to the output Y Y
will go down but now wat now that Y's
down there's no way for Y to come back
up during the evaluate phase it only can
come up during the pre-charge phase and
so there's an instant in time here when
we are getting the incorrect value in
fact we're violating our rule okay so
does this circuit work the answer is no
okay it violates our one rule you know
we're not asking much it's just one rule
just to Bay by this rule but this
circuit taking two dynamic inverters
putting them back-to-back
fails okay so what we require is
monotonicity and we're not getting it
with baseline dynamic logic okay so we
spend a lot of time thinking and working
on dynamic logic only to find out it
doesn't work at least it doesn't work
without some important modifications so
we just finished saying that dynamic
logic in its nominal form doesn't
actually work because if we take one
dynamic gate and we attach the output of
that dynamic gate to the input of
another dynamic gate it violates our one
rule okay so obviously we're not talking
about dynamic logic for no reason there
is a solution to this so the solution is
something called Domino logic
okay so how does this work so first we
notice that we can only have zero to one
transitions at the input to our dynamic
logic gates and we only have one to zero
transitions at the output recalling that
at the output of a dynamic logic gate
the the value either stays high it stays
pre-charged or it falls to zero it never
goes from 0 to 1 at the output ok so
there's a very simple solution here the
solution is to put an inverter a static
inverter between the outputs of your
gates ok so it would look something like
like the following
we have our normal dynamic logic gate we
have some pulldown network function that
we're computing down here and then we
have our an mas footer device here so
again this is the clock signal 5 we have
some inputs into our function in this
pulldown network here and we note that
these inputs only go from I guess 0 to 1
at the input here which means that our
outputs can only go from 1 to 0 at the
output so the idea here is we take a
normal static CMOS inverter and use this
as the inputs to some other pulldown
network ok
in a dynamic logic circuit that
is largely the same or is the same
overall structure as the previous stage
here and again when I draw the the input
going through here that doesn't mean
it's connecting to the bulk I'm ignoring
the bulk in this drawing assuming it's
just connecting through okay so what
this will do is going through the static
CMOS inverter it'll create a signal that
goes from 0 to 1 which indeed abides by
our one rule okay and then of course at
the output here we have another inverter
which means that this signal is falling
from 1 to 0 and this signal is rising
from 0 to 1 and so on and so forth
everything is perfect ok here perhaps
some other inputs that satisfy these
same rules so here what we say is that
dynamic outputs fall in succession just
like dominoes
okay so so in other words what we're
saying here is that all of the all of
the dynamic logic gates will get pre
charged to VDD and then if a gate ends
up falling or rather if the if the
output of a dynamic gate changes the
only way it can change is it's going to
fall okay so if it falls then that will
go through an inverter and create a
rising edge and then after that rising
edge will go into another dynamic logic
gate which will create another falling
edge and so on and so forth okay and I
just realized that I believe I spelt the
Domino's here like the pizza chain not
as actual Domino's okay there we go so
I'll make another note here note there's
some interesting things we can do here
the static inverter use between the
Domino gates is usually designed to be a
high schoo inverter okay why well we
only have one type of edge coming in we
have a falling edge at the input coming
in and therefore we only have a rising
edge at the output coming out okay so we
usually use a high schoo inverter for
better rising edges
okay now to be fair we will enter the
pre-charge phase and at which point we
could have a falling edge but it turns
out that for Domino logic we care less
about the timing of the pre-charge phase
because everything kind of happens in in
in parallel with the pre-charge phase
whereas in the evaluate phase things
fall down like dominoes and so we we
care much more about the timing of
things during the evaluate phase so one
question you might be asking yourself as
we've been going through this whole
process of dynamic circuits is why the
heck are we doing this you know we
started with this dynamic concept it
seemed interesting and then we said it
didn't work and so we have to introduce
Domino logic and now with Domino logic
we need to create a dynamic gate plus a
static gate it seems like we're really
you know making things more complicated
than they ought to be so it of course
turns out there's a good reason that we
are studying and talking about this but
let's discuss this so why bother with
dynamic circuits
all right so again there are good
reasons why we're doing this okay so let
me write the good reasons in green so
first of all we only require or it
requires n plus two transistors per
logic function okay now that that's true
for purely dynamic logic of course for
Domino logic that becomes n plus 4
transistors where of course n is the
number of inputs but this is much better
in some cases than for static CMOS which
requires 2 n transistors if you have n
inputs you need n n Mo's devices and n P
Mo's devices note in contrast pseudo n
MOS still actually wins it only requires
n plus 1 transistors but of course
pseudo n MOS has all sorts of problems
with static power consumption and so on
in addition the load parasitic
capacitance is small because we have
fewer transistors we have less load
capacitance this is great
unlike pseudo n MOS there is no static
power here ok
so recall that during the pre-charge
phase when the p MOS device is on the n
MOS footer is off and therefore there's
no current flowing through that that's
unlike pseudo n MOS where the p MOS is
always on and whenever the pulldown
network turns on there's static current
flowing through the circuit okay in
addition this is non ratioed logic so
that means it doesn't matter how you
size it the circuit will still be
functional okay it may not be optimal in
terms of performance and and you know
timing and energy and so on but it will
be functional ok and most importantly
dynamic logic is fast ok
let's try to understand this for a bit
so that the propagation delay
low-to-high
is well we have this pre-charge phase so
if we ignore the pre-charge phase for
just a moment the propagation delay from
low to high is zero because we're
already pre charged there's no
computation that needs to happen we
already have the right answer okay
that's of course ignoring the pre-charge
phase which you do have to consider as
part of your you know timing analysis
here and so on
but anyways if you ignore that this is
fast the propagation delay from high to
low we're gonna say is well small okay
smaller than static CMOS okay so we say
in the end overall when you factor in
all of the overhead we say it's say
something like 1.3 to 2x faster than
static CMOS okay and that's the main
reason why we use dynamic logic is
because it's faster okay but there is no
free lunch so we have some downsides so
let's make a little sad face so first
downside is we have high activity
factors okay
this results in high power so dynamic
logic is fast however there's a price
you pay for that speed and that's in
terms of power consumption in addition
we have a downside related to noise
leakage is a problem we can't we have to
refresh logic values and so on
there's charge sharing issues that we're
going to talk about momentarily etc so
there's a whole host of problems if you
want the most robust computation static
CMOS is the way to go and in fact it's
pretty energy efficient it's pretty fast
most designs today use static CMOS
however there is utility here
the main utility of dynamic logic is
that it's fast right so this was
previously and you know a variant of
domino logic was used in microprocessors
in the 90s and early 2000s ok so that
was true when those computers were
trying to you know get as many megahertz
as they could and power consumption
wasn't as large of a concern and so on
so now a days this is largely replaced
with or by static CMOS so most
microprocessors today are implemented
using static complimentary CMOS however
again if you're designing something and
you need to get to have the best energy
efficiency possible or sorry the best
speed possible dynamic and Domino logic
or family of Domino logic is still
possibly the right choice with all of
that being said this style of dynamic
logic is still used in memories and
specialized applications mostly for area
efficiency as we'll get
discussing in memories it turns out that
area is the number one criteria when we
get into those designs so as we alluded
to in the last slide there's there's a
lot of good reasons to build with
dynamic logic circuits but there are
also several issues okay so let's
discuss these now the first issue I want
to discuss is one that we've actually
already alluded to earlier and that is
leakage okay so let's just say already
introduced just to be clear all right so
this is happening from sub-threshold
leakage diode leakage and so on let's
just say it's most mostly from
sub-threshold leakage but it could be
gate leakage leakage and so on
ultimately what this does is it limits
the minimum frequency of our circuit
this is a strange concept to think about
in relation to our previous discussions
where we're always focused on the
maximum possible frequency we can
operate our circuit at but with with
dynamic logic we also have a minimum
frequency so let's just take a look at a
small example here so let's plot as we
are tending to do now a timing diagram
so let's say that we have a clock signal
looks something like this something like
that okay
this is perhaps not how we would
normally build a clock signal but for
the purposes of this example it'll do
all right and then let's go ahead and
plot the out of a dynamic logic gate
okay so let's just imagine in the prior
clock cycle we had totally discharged
our totally discharged our output so
we're at zero here and then when the
clock goes low we enter the pre-charge
phase so we charge all the way up to VDD
everything is good and then
when the clock gets released and the
pulldown network is not active because
of leakage we're gonna start trending
downwards here okay and so I'm gonna say
that we want to make sure that you know
we don't pass some threshold limit this
is debatable what this should be
but for let's just say for this example
we don't want to cross a VDD over two
because if we cross paths VDD over to
then we've definitely lost our logic
value for more robustness this threshold
should probably be larger than VDD over
two but I think it's a a reasonable
baseline case for us okay so we say the
point where we hit this VDD over two
threshold is going to be defined is
going to define the maximum period or
alternatively the minimum frequency that
we can operate at okay and then this
process will will continue as as shown
here okay so if we were to clock our
circuit at a slower frequency than this
leakage would basically totally disrupt
the logic stored on the capacitors in
our dynamic circuit okay
so therefore this means we effectively
need to recharge or refresh every node
in our circuit you know once a clock
period that's setting our minimum
frequency now of course they're still
also a maximum frequency we can't clock
the circuit too fast otherwise we get in
to propagation delay issues okay so this
is an issue is there solution well of
course there's a solution there's always
something we can do one possible
solution to this problem is something
called a keeper transistor and this is
actually something that should look
familiar to you
so what we do is we have our normal
dynamic logic circuit we have our
pulldown network then we have our an
Moss footer' device
P moss and the n Moss are connected
together this is the clock signal Phi
all right
there's some inputs into this pulldown
network okay so the issue with our
Domino logic is that this dynamic node
let's call this Y here can fall because
of leakage through the pulldown path
here okay so I leak we don't like that
it's Y is supposed to stay high if the
pulldown network is not active okay so
the solution is actually very clever
okay
so let's say that's output Y this is
output y bar here okay
so let's take this output here and what
we do is we feed it back through a PMO's
transistor this is called the keeper
transistor okay so let's just put an
arrow here keeper transistor alright now
this should look very familiar to you
when we discussed pass transistor logic
we suggested this as a way to get rid of
that VT drop across the in Moss pass
transistor so what happens in in this
case so if y is equal to zero and y bar
is equal to 1 then what happens so Y is
equal to 0 so the output Y bar is equal
to 1 that PMO's transistor is off is off
and the output stays at zero through the
pulldown network okay so the pulldown
network is pulling Y to zero that's a
strong low impedance connection to
ground it's going through the inverter
which is causing y bar to be at 1
everything is good in this scenario
there's no problems
situation two is if y is equal to 1 and
y bar is equal to 0 then at this point
so so y is equal to 1 it's supposed to
be staying high but the pulldown network
through leakage mechanisms might be
pulling Y low and we don't want that to
happen
however Y is 1 but Y bar as needed in
our dominant logic circuit is 0 that
turns on the pima's P Moss is on now
which combats the leakage from the
pulldown network keeping Y in the logic
high state ok this is excellent alright
so this totally solves the problem
however note let's just make a little
note here that this is now ratioed logic
since the pulldown network must be
strong enough to overpower the p MOS
when it wants to turn back on so the
solution to this issue is we make the p
MOS weak
remember that p MOS only needs to combat
the leakage so the p MOS has to be
stronger than the leakage path through
the pulldown network which is going to
be you know admittedly a rather low
amount of current all right so if we we
generally want to make that keeper
transistor a minimum size p MOS not even
size 2 per the class sizing convention a
size 1 p MOS okay that's as weak as
possible and the pulldown network if
it's properly designed to to have an
effective resistance of our should be
able to overpower the
peat moss and bring why low when it
needs to on the next cycle okay so this
is a very nice solution to this leakage
problem so let's discuss the next issue
and that's a little nefarious one called
charge sharing alright so the best way
to understand how this manifests is to
look at an example let's look at a
dynamic two input NAND gate and and a
two gate okay so let's just go ahead and
draw it first
so we have our p MOS header we have our
pulldown network which is just two
series and Moss's followed by our our n
Moss footer alright so the gate looks
something like this this is our clock
input Phi this is input a this is input
B and our output here is why okay
let's ignore the inverter after this we
can we can analyze this without looking
at that inverter so what I'd like to do
is I want to point out that on node Y we
have some parasitic capacitance we'll
call that C Y okay
but we also have some parasitic
capacitance at an internal node in this
circuit here let's call this node X and
this capacitance C X okay now let's
imagine that during this example B input
B is equal to zero alright and let's say
that V X was equal to zero initially so
perhaps in the prior phase of the clock
the pulldown network had had pulled
everything down and the X was equal to
zero in this example then we say a goes
from zero to one all right so what
happens let's take a look at our timing
diagram so let's say
five here let me do my timing diagram
I'm in a different color
fie let's say it goes like this okay
an a we say goes zero to one somewhere
over here B we've said is just zero all
the time hasn't changed now let's look
at node V X okay so we said that V X was
zero initially all right let me just
draw a little vertical line here to help
us we said that V X was zero and when
the clock turns on that will continue to
be true because a is 0 B is zero so if
so node X here is not changed at all
when the clock goes high and we entered
the evaluate phase however once a goes
high what happens the output Y is
nominally at at what value let's just
draw this down actually V y all right
during the pre-charge phase the output Y
is at logic one right now as soon as we
enter the evaluate phase let me just
draw a vertical line here just to be
extra precise as soon as we enter the
evaluate phase nothing happens to node Y
because the pulldown network is not on
despite that footer and mas being on
okay so as soon as transistor a turns on
what happens so so this continues here
as soon as transistor a turns on well
node Y was charged to VDD node X was
charged to zero and we've just turned on
a switch that connects these two okay so
what's going to happen is there's going
to be charge sharing alright so we can
draw the circuit that you know models
this we have node X and node Y C Y C X
the X V Y and we basically just close
this switch alright and so what's going
to happen is the charge on V Y which was
charged to VDD
is going to share with the charge on CX
so what's going to happen is node VX is
going to go up a little bit not all the
way likewise V Y is going to go down a
little bit not all the way to zero but
just a little bit okay and so what we
say here is that this distance here if
you will is equal to Delta V Delta V
okay so let's just write that write that
down in words when input a is asserted
this the transistor turns on we'll just
call it a switch in this example and
we're ignoring a V T drop and so on the
switch turns on and C X and C Y share
charge okay so we can say that after a
goes to one we say that the node V X is
equal to V Y ignoring our V T drop if
that is applicable which is equal to vdd
times the charge sharing capacitance
formula which is CY over C X plus CY and
we're going to say that's equal to Delta
V okay let me put a little asterisks
here and just say careful
if the out ends up becoming less than
VTN because then we have a threshold
drop across the N Mo's device and this
formula isn't totally correct because
it's no longer acting as a good switch
alright so it turns out that if CX the
value of the parasitic capacitance is
approximately equal to C Y which is not
a crazy assumption then the output drops
significantly
all right
possibly to the point where it may no
longer be a logic one at which point we
have a disaster okay so we really don't
want the output simply because one of
the other inputs
that's not causing the output to fall
you know by the computation of the logic
function decreases okay so we really
don't want the output to decrease other
than when the pulldown network fully
turns on okay so this is definitely a
problem so there has to be a solution to
this so the solution that we're going to
suggest here is to use extra pre-charge
transistors so what we do is as the name
implies we have our normal pre-charge
transistor here we have our NAND gate
structure down here and then our footer
device okay so this is our normal
dynamic logic gate so far nothing has
changed this is a this is B okay this is
the output Y so the idea here is it's
the charge sharing at the node between a
and B that's the problem so why don't we
just go ahead and also pre charge this
node to VDD if we pre charge that node
to VDD then if the same scenario happens
that that we described in the previous
slide happens here then when switch a
turns on V Y is already charged to VDD
VX is also charged to VDD so there's no
charge sharing they're both at the same
voltage okay so this works it solves the
problem completely however
but this has more parasitics we're
adding parasitic capacitance onto no tax
here more devices and therefore area
more clock power because we have more
capacitance on our clock napped and so
on so there's some downsides to doing
this now the other solution that we
could have done is let's just make sure
that CY is much larger than C X and
nominally that should be the case right
cy is you know has the extra P mas
attached to it it's driving a load and
so on it turns out that that load is in
Domino logic is usually just one
inverter so it's not you know a huge
load but you know it's definitely a load
nevertheless so usually CY is larger
than CX and we don't have to do this
sort of thing unless in very special
circumstances we are introducing it in
the lecture because this can and does
affect dynamic logic and so if it does
be aware that this is is a problem and B
there are some solutions to it so
there's another nefarious issue that can
crop up in dynamic logic and that has to
do with capacitive coupling okay so
again the best way to understand how
this manifests in dynamic logic circuits
is by means of an example so let's
imagine that we have a dynamic inverter
okay so it's dynamic because we have
this extra clock terminal that's that's
coming in here so we'll call this a
dynamic inverter and let's imagine that
this is driving some long wire somewhere
on the chip it's loaded by some inverter
somewhere else you know actually would
probably be loaded by some logic but we
have some load capacitance associated
with the output of the dynamic inverter
and then somewhere next to this circuit
we have a static
CMOS inverter okay and it's we know that
it's static because there's no clock
coming into it so this is a static CMOS
inv and we're going to call this the
aggressor okay so this is also driving
some long wire on the chip the wire has
some sort of load and so on
now these wires for layout reasons
happened to be very close to each other
so as a result there is parasitic
capacitance between the two wires we'll
call this C C okay so for example from
parallel plate one are in parallel
why are capacitance okay the wires are
routed close to each other okay
so in this scenario let's imagine that V
out is nominally you know being held at
VDD dynamically and then let's imagine
that this aggressor was at VDD and all
of a sudden it switches down to logic
zero so it's one oops
so it was at logic one and now it's at
logic zero so let's go ahead and draw a
circuit model that describes this
scenario so we have we can model our
aggressor as a voltage source that is
driving a capacitor that's driving
another capacitor okay so this is C C
this is CL and this here is the out and
the input here is coming from VDD to 0
okay so just to be clear here this is
describing the scenario so CL we say was
originally floating ad VDD just sitting
there floating you know in its happy
little little space it's a high
impedance node the pulldown network of
that inverter was not on it's just
sitting there okay so what happens here
is the aggressor the static CMOS
inverter is pulling down the line next
to it the wire next to it that capacity
couples into the output of the dynamic
inverter and we can actually write an
equation that describes what would
happen here the voltage on V out after
the switching am an event would be VD D
times VD D minor or minus VD D times C C
over C c plus CL okay so again what
might happen here is you might get a
situation where V out is just hanging
out and then when this when this edge
happens it's going to come down a little
bit okay it's going to come down by an
amount equal to VD D times C C over C c
plus CL okay that's the Delta V so again
if we say that if if C C is
approximately equal to CL this can
affect functionality
right we definitely want don't want this
delta-v to drop too much all right
so therefore the the conclusion here is
that layout particularly when we're
talking about dynamic logic although
it's this applies to all other forms of
logic is very important you really have
to be careful about how you are doing
your layout to make sure that you don't
have any unnecessary you know parallel
plate capacitance that might adversely
affect your dynamic logic circuits okay
this is a very important point now I do
want to make a note static CMOS is more
immune to this due to the resistive a
connection to VDD or ground so the
reason why I nag logic is so affected by
this is because the output is just
floating there in the evaluate phase if
it's set at VDD if the output is at
ground it's being strongly held down by
a pulldown network so this is actually
isn't a problem but in static CMOS
that's that's always the case so let's
just took take a look at a little
example let's imagine we have the same
scenario except in this case we don't
have a dynamic node but we have a static
CMOS node okay so everything's the same
see see CL the input is going from one
to zero okay but now instead of just
having this floating capacitor we now
also have a resistor that's going to VDD
and that resistances are on of the P
Mo's device alright and just to be
this here is V out all right so if we do
have a event where we have this
aggressor here then what's going to
happen is V out you know it's playing
happily at VDD there's going to be some
perturbation it's going to go down just
like it did in the dynamic case but
because that resistor is strongly
pulling things up it's eventually going
to pull it back up to VDD where this
voltage here is VDD okay so in other
words static CMOS is restoring will get
a glitch on the line at V out but it
won't drop and then stay there like it
does in dynamic circuits okay so this is
a big advantage of static CMOS design is
it's indeed much more robust to coupling
and noise and and so on and so forth so
another issue we may want to discuss is
the notion that normal Domino logic has
limited logic styles I guess this isn't
really a downside in the context that we
haven't considered this a downside for
normal static CMOS but I suppose we're
listing it as a downside because
eventually we'll have a solution to this
but the the issue at hand is that Domino
logic only performs non inverting
functions
for example because we have that extra
inverter at the output we're only
building an circuits ORS and so on but
not Nan's or Knorr and so on okay so
this may or may not be a problem
depending on the type of logic that you
are trying to build but if it were there
is a solution to this so a solution is
something called dual rail domino logic
okay sounds fancy let's figure out what
this is so what it looks like is as
follows we have a PMO's header switch we
have our pulldown network I'm going to
describe this as f bar in this case and
then what we do is we have another PMO's
header over here this goes into a
separate pulldown network of function f
and then these two guys combined to
finally have our n MOS footer switch
here okay so this footer switch is
driven by clock Phi same thing for the
these P Mo's devices also driven by
clock v so they're connected together in
other words all of our inputs come in
over here they also go into the other
pulldown network and then we have our
inverter that goes to output Y and
another inverter that goes to output Y
bar here okay so this is what we call a
dual rail Domino logic circuit so the it
actually looks pretty similar to our
kaskell Volta switch logic family that
we introduced a while ago but in this
case this is effectively the dynamic
version of it and the advantage of
building a dual rail Domino circuit is
that we now compute both say if we're
doing an and function we're now
computing both and and NAND okay
and that is possibly of use depending on
the type of computing application that
you're building so I think it's best to
try and understand this logic family
again with an example and in fact let's
go ahead and just build that exact thing
that I was talking about on the previous
slide an and and an and function
together in one gate all right so it's
going to look something like this we
have our PMO's header and then let's go
ahead and build the NAND gate first so
it looks something like this we have a B
this is connected to the clock Phi this
is going the output here goes through an
inverter and this is equal to Y is equal
to a and B so again that's the NAND
function here then we have the other
side of the circuit that's going to do
the complimentary function so this will
be something like this okay and then we
have our single and mas evaluate switch
here these transistors are our B bar and
a bar this p MOS pull-up is connected to
clock Phi and this goes through a static
CMOS inverter to generate Y bar is equal
to a a and B bar okay so how does this
work well if a and B are both equal to
one then the left side of the pulldown
network will turn on during the evaluate
phase which will cause Y to be equal to
logic one because the the internal node
discharges to logic zero if you look on
the other side of the of the circuit if
a and B are both equal to one then a bar
and B bar are both equal to zero and so
that pulldown network doesn't to turn on
and therefore the output of the that
pull-up network will be Y a was pre
charged to VDD and so Y bar in this case
is going to be equal to zero
all right now we do still have this
issue of of charge sharing okay and so
normally we have to go through the
inverter to get the the charge sharing
mechanism kind of sorted out in this
case with our dual rail Domino circuit
we can do something slightly more clever
and that is to build a cross coupled P
mas pair okay so basically what we do is
we take the output of this PMO's connect
it to the gate over there and so on okay
so these are what we refer to as cross
let me just spell it out cross coupled
keepers again looks similar to the casco
voltage switch logic family that we
discussed earlier but in this case it's
doing this through positive feedback
which was the same case before but now
with no static power consumption because
we have the the footer switch and the
header switches that are acting in the
right time okay now you might have
thought that we needed to end mas footer
devices for each branch but it turns out
we don't
since the pulldown networks are mutually
exclusive or in other words what we mean
by that only one is on at a time
we can use one device here instead of
what we would nominally require us to to
save area and power okay so this type of
circuit this dual rail Domino with the
cross couple keepers and so on this
circuit or the logic family that this
circuit represents was used in many
generations of Intel microprocessors
famously in the Pentium 4 actually was
also used in the Core 2 Duo line etc ok
it stopped my understanding anyways is
that it stopped at the core i5 i7 line
okay where they reverted back to static
complimentary CMOS so these circuits are
extremely fast that's why they were used
in a lot of these micro processors
though as we've discussed very costly in
power so just be aware when you're
building any form of dynamic circuit
that power consumption can be rather
high so please just do keep that in mind